+++
title = "Blog"
slug = "blog"
+++

# What is it like to build a Mixed Reality Application with no Experience! (You can do it too!)


### Overview
- Microsoft’s Hololens 2 is a mixed reality headset capable of overlaying virtual objects within the real world. This differs from what you would see within a [Virtual reality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_reality) (VR) headset. In a VR headset, your whole reality is replaced with virtual objects. Furthermore, mixed reality headsets like the Hololens 2, have a ton of applications. Whether that be for business, healthcare, education, or even entertainment, there is really no limit to what you could develop for. Fortunately, I had the opportunity and pleasure of not only using the Hololens 2 but also got to create and deploy an app to the headset. Here is my experience with the development process as well as some steps to do it yourself.

### Streight out of the Box
- When starting my internship at [Sears think[box]](https://case.edu/thinkbox/) I knew that I was going to be working with some expensive equipment. The Hololens 2 is not meant for consumers and is priced around $5000. This is the main reason why I haven’t developed anything within the Mixed Reality sector. I mean, there aren’t many mixed reality headsets in general other than Microsoft’s Hololen’s. But upon unboxing the headsets, it was so amazing to lay eyes on. It had the scent of what you would smell in a new car and the box that it was in portrayed a colorful and vibrant hummingbird levitating in the palms of someone’s hand. It was quite exuberating to see the headset itself. This luxurious piece of equipment made you look futuristic upon wearing it. Of course, because of the price tag and the clean look of the tech, I realized that developing for it may be very daunting. Furthermore, I had very little experience when developing for virtual reality. But I knew some things about the game engine [Unity](https://unity.com/) (a game engine owned by Microsoft). I also figured that the documentation might be good since Microsoft itself is known for having detailed and robust documentation as well as learning modules. 

### Getting Set-up
- I come from a computer science background. So, whenever I start a project, I always create a repository on Github so that I might be able to access it on other computers and also so that others can access it as well. Not to mention that when making your assets within Unity, it can be quite [GPU](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graphics_processing_unit) intensive. So, when leaving work, I often work on models using my workstation at home.

- The first thing I did when starting to develop an application is research by searching for information about the headset and its background. [Here is a good resource for learning about the headset itself](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/hololens/hololens2-hardware). Furthermore, I also looked at the prerequisites for building a mixed reality application as well as any software or dependencies that were needed in the process. All of this information can be found [here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/mixed-reality/develop/development). It is typically better to work with a computer that has a dedicated GPU. This is quite important if you are working with graphics-intensive applications and models.

### Developing the App in Unity
- The first thing step in the development process was to create a 3D scene on unity. Then within the viewport, I navigated to the `File` > `Build Settings`, and under the `Universal Windows Platform` I set `Target Device` to `Hololens`, `Architecture` to `ARM64`, `Build Type` to `D3D Project`,  `Target SDK` to `Latest installed`, `Minimum Platform Version` to `10.010240.0`, `Visual Studio Version` to `Latest installed`, `Build and Run on` to `Local Machine`, `Build Configuration` to `Release`. Finally, I clicked `Switch Platform` at the bottom of the screen. I know this was a lot of information! You can check out this [page](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/learn/modules/learn-mrtk-tutorials/1-3-exercise-configure-unity-for-windows-mixed-reality?tabs=openxr) for a more detailed view of the steps mentioned above. I will also include links to resources at the end of each section.

- The main dependency that I used for the development of this application was a package called the [Mixed Reality Toolkit(https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/mixed-reality/mrtk-unity/mrtk2/?view=mrtkunity-2022-05#getting-started-with-mrtk). This was a dependency that could be imported into the unity game engine. It comes pre-installed with all of the necessary scripts that are needed to run a mixed reality experience. Little knowledge of coding is required (although, it would help to know!). The Mixed Reality Toolkit is completely free and open for developers to use. I downloaded and extracted the file onto my desktop. Then I saw an application called `MixedRealityFeatureTool.exe` within the folder and ran it. I then followed these steps outlined [here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/learn/modules/learn-mrtk-tutorials/1-5-exercise-configure-resources?tabs=openxr). I finally imported the necessary packages within that application to the Unity project where I am developing my app. The next step is to configure the project for OpenXR. OpenXR is another software development kit (SDK) that comes with predefined scripts and tools that make it easier to deploy the unity project to the Hololens 2. I navigated to `Edit` > `Settings` > `Player` and changed the name of the application I am developing. This can be found within the `Publishing Settings` as Package Name. Upon changing this, the app will have that name within the Hololens 2 app library. More detailed steps can be found [here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/learn/modules/learn-mrtk-tutorials/1-5-exercise-configure-resources?tabs=openxr). I then created a new scene by navigating to `File` > `New Scene`. Within the new scene window, I pressed `Basic (Built-In) and then clicked `Create`.

- Within the scene, you are able to develop the main interface of the application. For example, if you wanted to see and manipulate a 3D model, you are able to do so within the Scene. So, within the hierarchy window, you can create a new object (maybe a cube) and then reset the transformation within the inspector window. You would be able to see that object inside of the Hololens headset if you were to build and deploy the application as is. However, you wouldn’t be able to manipulate the object or play with it without attaching some scripts to the object within the inspector window. The three main scripts that are used for object interaction using your hands include the [Box Collider](https://docs.unity3d.com/Manual/class-BoxCollider.html) component, the [Object Manipulator](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/mixed-reality/mrtk-unity/mrtk2/features/ux-building-blocks/object-manipulator?view=mrtkunity-2022-05) script component, and the [NearInteractionGrabbable](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.mixedreality.toolkit.input.nearinteractiongrabbable?view=mixed-reality-toolkit-unity-2020-dotnet-2.8.0) script component. This can be attached to the object by clicking the object and adding a `component` within the inspector window. You then have the option to search for these three components. Although, it should be noted that the Box Collider might already be attached to the object by default. The steps to making an object interactable can be found [here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/learn/modules/learn-mrtk-tutorials/1-7-exercise-hand-interaction-with-objectmanipulator).

### Building and Deploying to the Hololens
- This happened to be one of the more difficult steps to figure out. There are two ways to build and deploy your application to the Hololens 2. One way is to build and deploy your application wirelessly and the other way is to manually connect your Hololens 2 to the computer on which you are running Unity. For the sake of simplicity, I will explain how I successfully deployed the application using a USBC connection. First, I navigated to the Build Settings, within the build settings window I clicked `Add Open Scenes` to add a current scene to the ‘Scenes in Build’ list. Then I clicked the build button. Within the `Build Universal Windows Platform` window, I created a new folder (name it something descriptive) and I used this folder to store my build. I would then press the `Select Folder` button to start the build process.

- When the build process is complete, it is time to deploy your application to the Hololens headset. If you haven’t already done so, connect your headset to the computer using the USBC cable that the headset came with. The next step is to set the device to developer mode. This can be done within the headset by navigating through `settings` > `Update and Security` > `For Developers`. Then turn on `Use Developer Features and Device Discovery`. Then on the computer, locate the file that you stored your build using the file directory. There should be a file called `your project name.sln` (Note that “your project name” represents your project and is not the file name. Upon clicking on this, it will open up an application called “Visual Studios”. Visual Studios is a coding platform or an [Integrative Development](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integrated_development_environment) Platform (IDE) that Unity is reliant on for altering or creating scripts. Near the top of the interface within Visual Studios, I configured the visual Studios for Hololens by selecting the `Master` or `Release` and selecting the `ARM 64` architecture. (I used `Release`). You then want to pair the headset to the computer by pressing `Pair` within the headset. This will display a PIN in the Headset. Enter this PIN on the pop-up window within Visual Studios. When pairing is complete select `Done`. Finally, press the Play button at the top of the Visual Studios Interface to begin deploying the application to the headset. All of this information can be found in Microsoft’s [documentation](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/learn/modules/learn-mrtk-tutorials/1-7-exercise-hand-interaction-with-objectmanipulator).

### The Satisfaction of seeing your App

- This was quite a grind to get my application onto the Hololens 2. But it was worth it. The satisfaction of seeing my app within the Hololens 2 was immense. It made me want to take things to a different level. Perhaps building a more complex application. To think, if I can do this, what are the limits to I can build within a mixed reality environment? This, of course, built my confidence when thinking about my next project. It also bought me closer to my internship because I was able to prove that I can work on more complex problems that are presented within the company. Because I was able to do this I felt like the harder the challenge, the more satisfying the result! 